README.md, before:

# Docker Database Backup

[![Source](https://badgen.net/badge/icon/Source?icon=github&label)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup)
[![Checks](https://badgen.net/github/checks/jan-di/docker-database-backup)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/actions/workflows/build-docker-image.yml)
[![Release](https://badgen.net/github/release/jan-di/docker-database-backup/stable)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/releases)
[![Last Commit](https://badgen.net/github/last-commit/jan-di/docker-database-backup/main)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/commits/main)
[![License](https://badgen.net/github/license/jan-di/docker-database-backup)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/blob/main/LICENSE)

Dockerized service to automatically backup all of your database containers.

Docker Image Tags:

- `jandi/database-backup` [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/jandi/database-backup)
- `ghcr.io/jan-di/database-backup` [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/pkgs/container/database-backup)

## Service Configuration

Configure the backup service by specifying environment variables:

Name | Default | Description
--- | --- | ---
`TZ` | `UTC` | Time Zone for scheduling and log messages
`SCHEDULE` | (none) | Specify a cron expression or an interval (number of seconds to wait between backup cycles). Leave undefined to make a one time run. See [Croniter Documentation](https://pypi.org/project/croniter) for cron options.
`SCHEDULE_HASH_ID` | (none) | Seed for hashed components in cron expressions. If not defined, the hostname of the container is used.
`RUN_AT_STARTUP` | (none) | Do a backup right after the backup service starts. If not defined, it is enabled when using an interval as schedule, and disabled when using cron expressions. Not used, if no schedule is defined.
`DUMP_UID` | `-1` | UID of dump files. `-1` means default (docker executing user)
`DUMP_GID` | `-1` | GID of dump files. `-1` means default (docker executing user)
`HEALTHCHECKS_IO_URL` | (none) | Base Url for [Healthchecks.io](https://healthchecks.io) integration
`DEBUG` | `false` | More verbose output for debugging
`DOCKER_NETWORK_NAME` | `database-backup` | Prefix for the name of the internal network, that is used to connect to the database containers.
`DOCKER_TARGET_NAME` | `database-backup-target` | Prefix for the name of the internal hostname, that is used to connect to the database containers.
`INSTANCE_ID` | `default` | Unique ID of each backup service instance. Must only be specified if more than one instance should be run on the same docker engine. If you change the value of `INSTANCE_ID`, the backup service container also needs a label `jan-di.database-backup.instance_id` with the same value, to allow it to find itself via the docker API.

You can also define global default values for all container specific labels. Do this by prepending the label name by `GLOBAL_`. For example, to provide a default username, you can set a default value for `jan-di.database-backup.username` by specifying the environment variable `GLOBAL_USERNAME`. See next chapter for reference.

## Database Configuration

Configure each database container by specifying labels. Every label must be prefixed by `jan-di.database-backup.`:

Name | Default | Description
--- | --- | ---
`enable` | `false` | Enable backup for this container
`type` | `auto` | Specify type of database. Possible values: `auto, mysql, mariadb, postgres`. Auto tries to get the type from the image name (for specific well known images)
`username` | `root` | Login user
`password` | (none) | Login password
`port` | `auto` | Port (inside container). Possible values: `auto` or a valid port number. Auto gets the default port corresponding to the type.
`dump_name` | (none) | Overwrite the base name of the dump file. If not defined, the container name is used.
`dump_timestamp` | `false` | Append timestamp to dump file (Format: `_YYYY-MM-DD_hh-mm-ss`)
`compress` | `false` | Compress SQL Dump with gzip
`compression_level` | `6` | Gzip compression level (1-9)
`encrypt` | `false` | Encrypt SQL Dump with AES
`encryption_key` | (none) | Key/Passphrase used to encrypt

## Example

Example docker-compose.yml:

```yml
version: '3.8'

services:
  db-backup: # backup service
    image: ghcr.io/jan-di/database-backup
    environment:
      - TZ=Europe/Berlin
      - SCHEDULE=600
      - GLOBAL_PASSWORD=secret-password
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

  database1: # well known database image
    image: mariadb:latest
    environment:
      - MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret-password
    labels:
      - jan-di.database-backup.enable=true

  database2: # custom database image
    image: user/my-database:latest
    environment:
      - DB_PASSWORD=secret-password
    labels:
      - jan-di.database-backup.enable=true
      - jan-di.database-backup.type=postgres
      - jan-di.database-backup.password=other-password
```

## Credits

Inspired by [kibatic/docker-mysql-backup](https://github.com/kibatic/docker-mysql-backup)

Commit message:

Add dump file retention policies (closes #14)

README.md, after:

# Docker Database Backup

[![Source](https://badgen.net/badge/icon/Source?icon=github&label)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup)
[![Checks](https://badgen.net/github/checks/jan-di/docker-database-backup)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/actions/workflows/build-docker-image.yml)
[![Release](https://badgen.net/github/release/jan-di/docker-database-backup/stable)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/releases)
[![Last Commit](https://badgen.net/github/last-commit/jan-di/docker-database-backup/main)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/commits/main)
[![License](https://badgen.net/github/license/jan-di/docker-database-backup)](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/blob/main/LICENSE)

Dockerized service to automatically backup all of your database containers.

Docker Image Tags:

- `jandi/database-backup` [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/jandi/database-backup)
- `ghcr.io/jan-di/database-backup` [GitHub Container Registry](https://github.com/jan-di/docker-database-backup/pkgs/container/database-backup)

## Service Configuration

Configure the backup service by specifying environment variables:

Name | Default | Description
--- | --- | ---
`TZ` | `UTC` | Time Zone for scheduling and log messages
`SCHEDULE` | (none) | Specify a cron expression or an interval (number of seconds to wait between backup cycles). Leave undefined to make a one time run. See [Croniter Documentation](https://pypi.org/project/croniter) for cron options.
`SCHEDULE_HASH_ID` | (none) | Seed for hashed components in cron expressions. If not defined, the hostname of the container is used.
`RUN_AT_STARTUP` | (none) | Do a backup right after the backup service starts. If not defined, it is enabled when using an interval as schedule, and disabled when using cron expressions. Not used, if no schedule is defined.
`DUMP_UID` | `-1` | UID of dump files. `-1` means default (docker executing user)
`DUMP_GID` | `-1` | GID of dump files. `-1` means default (docker executing user)
`HEALTHCHECKS_IO_URL` | (none) | Base Url for [Healthchecks.io](https://healthchecks.io) integration
`DEBUG` | `false` | More verbose output for debugging
`DOCKER_NETWORK_NAME` | `database-backup` | Prefix for the name of the internal network, that is used to connect to the database containers.
`DOCKER_TARGET_NAME` | `database-backup-target` | Prefix for the name of the internal hostname, that is used to connect to the database containers.
`INSTANCE_ID` | `default` | Unique ID of each backup service instance. Must only be specified if more than one instance should be run on the same docker engine. If you change the value of `INSTANCE_ID`, the backup service container also needs a label `jan-di.database-backup.instance_id` with the same value, to allow it to find itself via the docker API.

You can also define global default values for all container specific labels. Do this by prepending the label name by `GLOBAL_`. For example, to provide a default username, you can set a default value for `jan-di.database-backup.username` by specifying the environment variable `GLOBAL_USERNAME`. See next chapter for reference.

## Database Configuration

Configure each database container by specifying labels. Every label must be prefixed by `jan-di.database-backup.`:

Name | Default | Description
--- | --- | ---
`enable` | `false` | Enable backup for this container
`type` | `auto` | Specify type of database. Possible values: `auto, mysql, mariadb, postgres`. Auto tries to get the type from the image name (for specific well known images)
`username` | `root` | Login user
`password` | (none) | Login password
`port` | `auto` | Port (inside container). Possible values: `auto` or a valid port number. Auto gets the default port corresponding to the type.
`compress` | `false` | Compress SQL Dump with gzip
`compression_level` | `6` | Gzip compression level (1-9)
`encrypt` | `false` | Encrypt SQL Dump with AES
`encryption_key` | (none) | Key/Passphrase used to encrypt
`retention_policy` | `none` | Type of retention policy used to cleanup dump files. Possible values: `none`, `simple`, `all` See below for more info.
`retention_min_count` | `auto` | Backups below this count will be kept, ignoring the `max` constraints. `auto` sets the value based on `retention_policy`
`retention_min_age` | `auto` | Backups below this age will be kept, ignoring `max` constraints. See [Tempora Documentation](https://tempora.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#tempora.parse_timedelta) for possible values. `auto` sets the value based on `retention_policy`
`retention_max_count` | `auto` | Backups above this count will be deleted. `auto` sets the value based on `retention_policy`. Value `0` means no limit.
`retention_max_age` | `auto` | Backups above this age will be deleted. See `retention_min_age` for possible values. `auto` sets the value based on `retention_policy`. Value `0s` means no limit.
`dump_name` | (none) | Overwrite the base name of the dump file. If not defined, the container name is used.
`dump_timestamp` | `auto` | Append timestamp to dump file (Format: `_YYYY-MM-DD_hh-mm-ss`). Default value depends on the used retention policy.

### Database Type

The database type is automatically resolved by checking the image tag. If the image is is not a well known image, you can provide the database type manually. 

Type | Description | Related Options / Default Values
--- | --- | ---
`mysql` | MySQL | `port=3306`
`mariadb` | MariaDB | `port=3306`
`postgres` | Postgres | `port=5432`

### Retention Policy

You can choose one of the following retention policies for each container. All default values of the retention policy can be overriden manually.

Policy | Description | Related Options / Default Values
--- | --- | ---
`none` (default) | Only the newest dump file per database will be kept. Timestamps are deactivated by default. | `dump_timestamps=false`, `retention_min_count=1`, `retention_min_age=0s`, `retention_max_count=1`, `retention_max_age="0s"`
`simple` | Dump files will be kept/deleted according to count and age. | `dump_timestamps=true`, `retention_min_count=10`, `retention_min_age=0s`, `retention_max_count=0`, `retention_max_age="1 month"`
`all` | All dump files are being kept. | `dump_timestamps=true`, `retention_min_count=1`, `retention_min_age="0s"`, `retention_max_count=0`, `retention_max_age="0s"`

## Example

Example docker-compose.yml:

```yml
version: '3.8'

services:
  db-backup: # backup service
    image: ghcr.io/jan-di/database-backup
    environment:
      - TZ=Europe/Berlin
      - SCHEDULE=600
      - GLOBAL_PASSWORD=secret-password
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

  database1: # well known database image
    image: mariadb:latest
    environment:
      - MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret-password
    labels:
      - jan-di.database-backup.enable=true

  database2: # custom database image
    image: user/my-database:latest
    environment:
      - DB_PASSWORD=secret-password
    labels:
      - jan-di.database-backup.enable=true
      - jan-di.database-backup.type=postgres
      - jan-di.database-backup.password=other-password
```

## Credits

- Thanks to [@foorschtbar](https://github.com/foorschtbar) for many feature contributions
- Inspired by [kibatic/docker-mysql-backup](https://github.com/kibatic/docker-mysql-backup)
